## WP3 Transmission Visibility of Distribution Flexibilities

As well as the impacts of LCTs on the characteristics at the household and low voltage level, large uptakes of unknown quantities of distributed generation are already having an impact on planning and assessment tools at the Transmission level. One of the major sources of load forecast errors for the National Grid occurs on sunny days providing large amounts of PV generation at largely indeterminate locations on the network. Linking information from smart metering and energy end usage analytics ([WP2](http://bstephen.github.io/amidine/wp2/)), this work package aims to use advanced mathematical and statistical techniques to gain greater visibilities and insights into the demands/generation on the entire grid network from distribution up to the transmission level. This package aims to use state-of-the-art techniques to generate probabilistic forecasts, quantify uncertainty, understand the main drivers of forecasting errors, and characterise network aggregations points such as substations. This will enable operators to infer potential network flexibility and the viability of particular network solutions (such as DSR and storage devices). 

The work package can be split into three main subtasks

1.	Hierarchical Probabilistic Load Forecasting - The volatility and increased uncertainty of demand and generation means probabilistic load forecasts are required at all levels of the electrical network hierarchy from household to the transmission level. Further we must ensure coherency between the different levels of the hierarchy so that hypothesis can be translated through disaggregation and aggregation.  

These forecasts will be augmented with probabilistic demand/generation forecasts of significant low carbon technologies, in particular with a focus on distributed generation. This provides two benefits; 1) the generation of scenario forecasts will assist network planning and management, and 2) creates a tool for the calibration of the forecasts to estimate current generation resources. This can hence assist in the reduction in forecast errors at the transmission level.

2.	Drivers and Influencers - Increases in unknown photovoltaics installations have already introduced significant sources of errors in forecasts at the transmission level. Further effects from other LCTs have yet to be fully understood. In this subtask we use our hierarchical probabilistic forecast framework to identify sources and drivers of forecast errors and uncertainty. This will include the investigation of weather effects, technologies pervasiveness, and customer aggregations (WP 3.3).

3.	Characterisation and Reporting - Through the hierarchical forecasting framework (WP3.1), the identification of forecast errors (WP3.2) we can then develop a characterisation of the networks. In this work package we create a robust characterisation of the demand behaviour of primary substations in terms of their variability/predictability in order infer the flexibility and the viable network solutions available. The characterisation will be linked to WP3 which will infer salient features from the customer disaggregation. The methods and techniques will be developed using our experience in probabilistic load forecasting, unsupervised discrimination, Gaussian processes, and feature extraction. Inferences can be scaled up from the preliminary data sets to the national level, e.g. through bootstrapping methodologies. 
