WP1 Beyond Balancing – Power System Observability Benefits on the LV Network 

DNOs are presently aware of the potential effects of LV network loads but unable to quantify the impact these have on the voltage characteristics, phase balance and power flows on distribution feeders. Failure to contain these may result in regulatory limits being violated, quality of supply compromised or assets being aged prematurely.

1.	Probabilistic voltage profiling takes the operation of the network away from hard limits and introduces ranges of plausible scenarios, allowing situations to be planned for according to their likelihood of occurrence. State estimation has been long established at higher levels of the network where expected loads were more stable and operating timescales could be drawn out owing to flexibility of generation. State estimation, required more than ever for LV, is a more challenging task with time varying non-linear relations, non-stationary load profiles and the need to run at much higher time resolutions. Quantification of flexibilities, translates into pricing for services that may be offered to system operators for balancing the system or maintaining grid stability at a sub-regional level. 
2.	Premises Phase Identification and Balancing – the ’last mile’ of networks often have been constructed in such a way that the actual allocation of premises to phases is not known, with verification being required through a time consuming test from within the premises. Furthermore, the heterogeneity of loads can result in individual phases being overloaded while others are lightly loaded at specific times. Smart Meters coupled with substation monitors could deal with this problem by utilising outputs from WP3 to disaggregate phase allocations from multiple premises as well as combinatorial optimisation procedures to identify plausible rebalancing scenarios. Key challenges here are the need to work with small samples, possible missing data, noise/losses resulting in incomplete compositions and incomplete smart meter populations. Imbalanced phases can lead to premature plant degradation and increased network losses. 
3.	Relation between reactive power and voltage magnitude changes – the depletion of conventional generation on the transmission network and its general absence on the distribution network predicates an alternate means of reactive power absorption to control voltage levels. The associated sensitivity of voltages is very much network and demand specific, necessitating a means of modelling this relation for future development of control strategies or choice of control strategy. State Estimation tools that can approximate this functionality at MV level would not be able to deal with the non-linear and non-Gaussian behaviours exhibited by the loads observed at LV level – this hypothesis will be tested and used to develop state estimators that are based on high dimensional Copula. Copulas permit a flexible means of articulating non-Gaussian dependency structures (which in turn can deal with seasonal and diurnal induced non-stationary behaviour) and with more recent developments in finance (e.g. Factor Copulas) that allow latent variables in low dimensional space to drive the observed behaviours in higher dimensions, possible state estimation candidates that work with the probabilistic formulations of load developed in WP2 can be derived.
4.	Loss characterisation with respect to network footprint, phase balance and end user load behaviour – is increasingly important given the implications for accurate estimation; assumptions of a single standard load profile across regions, times of day, customer types and assumed seasonality will not necessarily hold at distribution level. This work package will utilise the representations developed in WP2.1 along with partner distribution network topologies to identify how losses can be approximated in the presence of limited data. Dirichlet type compositional models to characterise phase imbalance and its seasonal evolution will be developed alongside the load forecasting work in WP3.1.
