WP2 Providing load understanding and insights

The thorough analysis of consumption readings as provided on a per MPAN basis will allow us to develop understanding of the different behaviour that is visible only through users energy consumption. New and state-of-the-art unsupervised machine learning methods (clustering algorithms) to group and generate insights from daily profiles and time series will be investigated. This information will be directly used as feedback to WP3 in three ways: 1) to create specific models of different segmented groups of users where the segmentation is based on different energy consumption features and not just metadata as input to the hierarchical forecasting framework and 2) to characterise points of aggregation within the network, such as substations, aggregating the typical consumption profiles for clusters and 3) to help in the creation of possible scenarios where LCT are included.

Two different analysis strategies will be followed. First, consumption of individual users can be compared among the larger cohort of users to which the analysis has access to find these distinct groups. Secondly, we are able to conduct time series analysis of an individual user to detect important internal behavioural changes, both temporary and permanent. Analysis to connect the resulting groups with the readings and users meta-data is then performed to explain the underlying reasons for the formation of these groupings, e.g. seasonal changes, building refurbishment and how user behavioural changes with the introduction of LCTs.

There are three research streams to be included in this WP:
1)	Deriving commonality amongst MPAN behaviours. Increasing the visibility of behaviour of customers that incorporate new technologies such as PV panels, batteries and EV. Additionally, as we have already experience in the analysis of domestic customers (EPSRC ADEPT project EP/I000194/1) and non-domestic customers (EPSRC WICKED project EP/L024357/1), specific clustering methods should be incorporated. e.g. retail consumers have basically a unique large peak during the trading times that can be treated with different algorithms than domestic profiles. This will include understanding of how behavioural flexibility will affect the visibility of different technologies within the data collected.
2)	Temporal group migration pattern capture/prediction. Demand-side response and behavioural change motivations will be investigated. These different drivers can be external perturbations such as a cold Winter driving extreme electrical demands or they could be internally social or domestic driven changes such as adoption of storage or low carbon heating. Investigating the typical behaviour changes (e.g. peak reduction) for any of these drivers and specific customers and articulating these as dynamic models whose stability characteristics can be formally assessed and simulated is the key learning objective of this work package.
3)	Disaggregating a common MPAN. The implantation of (nearly) zero-energy new non-domestic buildings (demand equal to supply) by 2019 is one of the measures to reduce carbon emissions. For this reason, we must be able to deeply analyse the nature of the final consumption profile to see when and where new LCT can be incorporated and how they will directly contribute to the aims. Given the profile obtained directly from the MPAN readings, as well as other input such as consumer meta-data and other external sources (e.g. meteorological information) we will separate the profile into generation/storage and consumption. A blind source separation approach e.g. Empirical Model Decomposition or Independent Component Analysis will be used to disaggregate new profiles that have not seen before. To simplify somewhat we will of course ensure that we pre-separate domestic and non-domestic consumers.

Mature ML techniques that have been successful applied in other disciplines where large data sets have been accessible for decades such as computational linguistics or biomedicine will be tested over the MPAN sets. Examples of these techniques are Non-parametric Bayesian algorithms and types of supervised and unsupervised machine learning.

One of the main factors to consider is the scale up of the amount of users (millions) that implies the use of efficient algorithms and the selection of features that can explain better the user behaviour.
